Wizard's Way is a film. The stars of the Wizard's Way are Julian Andrews and Barry Tubbbulb. Julian is a dragon slayer and enjoys Sprite. Barry is rabbit breeder and enjoys 7Up. 

They play a game called Wizard's Way. To play Wizard's Way you have to have scored at least an 'A' in GCSE Maths and an 'A' in either A-Level Maths or A-Level Further Maths. But being a good wizard is about way more than maths. You've got to be brave, soulful, wise, well-dressed and manage your time well. A spell ought to take at least a month to prepare and should only be cast if absolutely necessary and not just for fun, unless it's a fun spell and they take years to formulate and require savant-like algebra abilities.

The film documents the end of Wizard's Way - it's deleted by its creator Compusoft because most of the population of Wizarderia have started playing World of Warcraft, which Barry and Julian would never do because, unlike Wizard's Way, World of Warcraft is very unrealistic. The life of a wizard is deceptively peaceful, not much happens.

The film is about the decline and fall of a classic computer game. But the film is also about hamburgers. The problem at the heart of every hamburger is the ratio of beef to bread. Traditionally, this is two parts bread to one part beef. You probably already agree that this ratio is really flawed. But, if you don't, the film Wizard's Way will challenge your preconception about beef to bread ratios. 

Wizard's Way is being screened this Saturday at 6pm at Shortwave cinema in London. The film is an official selection for the London Independent Film Festival. Come along and drink a Sprite with Julian or a 7Up with Barry.  

World of Warcraft is total unrealistic crap. Save Wizard's Way. Join Julian and Barry's campaign to save a computer game that puts soul, love and statistics before good graphics and slick, totally addictive playability. SAVE WIZARD'S WAY!

--

Wizard's Way was written and directed by Metal Man (who are Socrates Adams-Florou, Chris Killen and Joe Stretch).

For more information, please visit: www.savewizardsway.com


http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j-W9QSos1Us
