au-al-0239-1000
Copyright 2012 Perini Networks Europe Ltd.
CC BY-NC-ND

Phenomenal People: celebrating women everywhere

-top

Phenomenal People is a new site to support Women Of the World, an annual festival taking place this weekend in London. Here's what Rachel Coldicutt and Katy Beale of Caper, producers of the site, had to say about the campaign, and the festival it helps to promote.

-pic

The Phenomenal People website, part of the Women Of the World Festival 2012, is an amazing online resource of inspiring women throughout history to the present day. Our Tumblr site shares the incredible stories and achievements from political activists to religious figures, astronauts to opera singers, war reporters to nurses. 

->

This annual festival presents, celebrates and recognises women from all walks of life, acting as a conversation space for issues of all kinds. WOW includes three days of talks, debates, markets, workshops, mentoring and evening events. Phenomenal People is commissioned by Fuel, and designed by Caper. 

Our other projects at Caper include Culture Hack, Coding for Kids, Happenstance and Women in a Room, the latter being a meet up for women to talk about work, life and technology. 

For the site, we researched and collated hundreds of examples of inspiring women from all around the world, current and historical - from political activists to religious figures, astronauts to opera singers, war reporters to nurses. We built a bespoke Tumblr theme, which allowed us to showcase the content we had already collated, plus allow people to nominate their own inspiring women. It's a fairly rudimentary submission system - Google Forms - but that fits with the timescale and the budget, and allows for a level of moderation. We additionally devised a social media and blogger seeding campaign, rolling out throughout this week and targeting lifestyle, politics, feminist, arts and culture and tech. 

We've already had a large number of repeat visits to the site, which sits with the fact that there is a lot to explore and new things are being added all the time. The site isn't just for women, though. It's for anyone to add to, explore and discover. 

Here's what the co-directors of Fuel, Louise Blackwell and Kate McGrath, had to say:

“Phenomenal People is about raising the profile of women with both men and women. Using the word ‘people’ is intentionally provocative. Stories of men are everywhere, statues if men are everywhere. Women are people, men are people. This project is about women and for both women and men. Calling it Phenomenal Women would put some (not all) men off. We like the idea that someone may look at the website and be surprised/provoked that all the people are women. 

"We won't include inspirational men in the future. We want men to contribute stories of women who inspire them. If the project was called Phenomenal People and then was all about men would not be a surprise to us, it would be another place where the stories of women are excluded.” 

Discover, explore and join the discussion at the Phenomenal People website. http://phenomenalpeople.tumblr.com/ 

You can also join Fuel’s artists in person for a weekend of art, inspiration and storytelling at the Southbank Centre's Women of the World Festival, taking place this weekend. Artists appearing over the weekend include Makiko Aoyama, Malika Booker, Natasha Chivers, Lizzie Clachan, Natalia Kaliada, Frauke Requardt and Melanie Wilson.

--

Katy Beale and Rachel Coldicutt are co-directors of Caper.
The Southbank Centre's Women of the World Festival takes place 09/03/12 - 11/03/12.
Further information is available on the Southbank Centre's website, Facebook page, and #wow2012.

http://ticketing.southbankcentre.co.uk/wow
#wow2012
facebook.com/womenoftheworldfestival
http://ticketing.southbankcentre.co.uk/wow
http://wearecaper.com/
http://phenomenalpeople.tumblr.com/


