au-al-0129-1002
Copyright 2012 Perini Networks Europe Ltd
CC BY-NC-ND

MEL CROUCHER: INFINITE AUTOMATA


Mel Croucher is a true pioneer in the history of video games in the UK. He is the founder of (in)famous software house Automata, whose work throughout the early 1980s is now considered to be pioneering in its use of multimedia and transmedia. The prize of Pimania was a golden sundial, hidden in an English hillside; Deus ex Machina came complete with a game-synchronised soundtrack featuring performances from Ian Dury and Jon Pertwee, among others. 

[Pic]

Mel has been a guest of Imperica in the past and we're delighted to welcome him back for a Q&A. Thanks to everyone that submitted a question.



You were well-known for producing ground-breaking and often thought-provoking titles. If you were trying to sell unusual games today, how would your approach differ from the way you went about it in the Eighties?

Good question, because I am in the process of trying to sell unusual games today. I've been working on something I call Emotional Intelligence as an evolution of Artificial Intelligence, which powers a personality inside your smartphone or tablet. The objective is to get the avatar to fall in love with the player, or at least have a roller-coaster relationship in the process. Bollocks to slaying a dragon and rescuing a princess. This princess may well slay you if you lie to her!

I admit that I still don't relish being involved with traditional marketing, fighting it out with all the mainstream stuff that's out there, and with this particular title I am talking to third-party developers. So, my approach is different in as much as I've written the thing, produced an HD video trailer, and taken it to market for someone else to worry about. It's a big concept, and I know my limitations.

With the remake of Deus Ex Machina, my limitations may well turn out to be my strengths, because I'm releasing a multi-media book to go with it, provisionally titled The Best Game You Never Played In Your Life. It's the whole story of me "trying to sell unusual games" from the 1960s right up to Deus 2. No stone left unturned.

I always tried to get the public directly involved with my titles, like with the PiManiacs doing real things in the real world. My current approach has only differed in the fact that it's so incredibly easy to outreach now, thanks to the web. For example, I've got loads of "dissidents" who have confessed their crimes on the Deus ex Machina 2 website, and supplied mugshots that I've included in the game itself.

 

Some parts of Deus Ex Machina happen to be quite tricky to understand, but I have a main question for you about it: what is the meaning of the 'Fertilizer Song' excerpt being included at the very end of the audio story?

Great question! I was a bit limited in trying to make a fully interactive movie that would change your life on a 48K Spectrum, but I guessed that the technology would eventually catch up with the concept. I thought it would take a few years to catch up, but in fact it's taken 30 years . I reckon the market's ready now, though, with hundreds of millions of people carrying around games machines with HD images and digital sound in their pockets. So, the final excerpt of the Fertilizer Song (and Ian Dury's laugh) on Deus Ex Machina was a trailer for Deus Ex Machina 2. Listen out for the full-blown big band introducing the Fertilizer this time round!

 

 

[YouTube]
"Fertilizer Song" performed by Ian Dury, "Deus ex Machina" soundtrack, 1984

 

 

Why was there an extensive use of BASIC in your early games? Was it to save development time, or cost, or both?

You want the truth? I didn't know there was any alternative to BASIC. I just designed the games, and I wrote them fast. My beloved sociopathic programmer could hardly write BASIC; in fact, he could hardly write at all. But, as long as we started a new title when the pub opened and finished by closing time, I was happy. When the first school-kid walked through the door at Automata with something he'd written in machine code, I thought he was from another planet. Turned out he was from another planet.

 

As gaming became increasingly commercialised into the mid-80s, did you miss the early "startup" days of Automata and many other software houses?

In a word, yes. The arrival of corporations was the main reason I quit. But hey, I don't miss those days any more because it feels like they're back. Thanks to apps, and (hopefully) the Raspberry Pi, I reckon that a whole new generation is about to experience those days all over again. By the way, do me a favour and ask Eben Upton if the "Pi" bit of Raspberry Pi is a reference. He looks far too young to have been a PiManiac, but maybe his mum was.

 

How did you conceive the idea for Pimania, in particular the prize of the Golden Sundial? How did you bury it?

The usual. I conceived it down the pub. I was taking the piss out of all those dreadful quests and tedious text adventures, when someone said something about me thinking I could do better.... and I thought I could, if I made it real. So, I added real music, and a cartoon character with a real personality. and a real treasure instead of pretend treasure. And a real-world setting instead of a fantasy-world setting. And the co-ordinates of the game were set in a real solar system, a real calendar, a real clock and a real sundial. A jeweller I knew had just won the De Beers Diamond Award, so I thought I'd have a bit of that, and commissioned her to make my sundial.

I didn't bury the Golden Sundial at all, even though we had people digging holes from Stonehenge to Bethlehem. Sorry about that. I thought it was clear you just had to turn up at the right place at the right time to win it, but obviously not. Anyway, the location was a horse's arse - the arse of one of those giant chalk horses carved in the downs. My comment on adventure quest games. The winners turned up in the horse's mouth, but I didn't have the heart to tell them their mistake.

 

You are as prolific a writer as you are a producer of computer games. If you were given the choice of only one of these activities, which one would it be?

Hopefully, I can cheat and merge the two. Interactive books.

 

How is Deus ex Machina 2 going?

It was finished a wee while back. PC and Mac only. Now we're talking about a simultaneous release for iPhones, and Android, but it's out of my hands. If we go for the all-formats option, then we could still be six months away. Keep smiling.

 

Many thanks to Mel for taking the time to answer. Mel's website contains full information on his current activities.


http://www.melcroucher.com/
