au-al-0257-1000
Copyright 2012 Perini Networks Europe Ltd
CC NC-BY-ND

IN CONVERSATION WITH... ALEXANDRA DESCHAMPS-SONSINO AND JONATHAN MACDONALD

(Preamble)

The concept of the Internet of Things has received almost total praise: possibilities of devices talking to each other in subtle, contextually-relevant ways have stimulated thoughts and work from governments to startups.

(Pic)

However, does the Internet of Things deliver a connected utopia, or does it give us a land of confusion resulting in an avalanche of data? We brought Alexandra Deschamps-Sonsino and·Jonathan MacDonald together to discuss the potential impacts of a future that is always on.

(Read More)


Please start by summarising your thinking on the Internet of Things.

JM: From a factual point of view, that the more things that are connected and the more data there is exchanging, the volume of that in terms of size - not in audio - goes up directly proportionately to the amount of devices that are connected. What I mean by volume or noise is not derogatory. The sound of a modem dialling up is noise, and that no longer exists with broadband. Moving from a technological to a human level, street lamps that are communicating with each other or becoming wifi hotspots - that's perfectly great as a utility, and I'm not saying that in a facetious way - there can genuinely be a requirement for that utility. My extreme concern is that it is not a utility for people that do not need it to be one. Therefore, what it is for people that do not need it to be a utility, is noise, and at worst, unnecessary noise and distraction caused by use-cases from the perspective of utility rather than from a business case. To put it another way, driverless vehicles are a brilliant concept, but for those who like driving, it's an absolute disaster. For those who like heads not tails, having 10 tails resulting from 10 coin flips is a scientific wonder, but for those who like heads, it is disastrous. Walking past shop front windows which turn into multimedia displays that allow you to search for holidays, is amazing if you want to walk down a High Street and do that. If you're quietly walking home while enjoying the peace and quiet of nature, it's a disaster. We only look through one perspective; the yin and yang without the yin. It's like a permanent requirement for sunshine, with no appreciation for the night.

 

Are we now becoming too focused on the fact of doing this stuff rather than addressing the wider vista of more radical scenarios?

JM: When you're a hammer, everything looks like a nail. When you're a technologist, every solution is solved through technology. When you make touch screens, there probably isn't a limit to what can be solved in society by touch screens. In mobile, it isn't weird to seek a cure for cancer using mobile phones. If you are in the game of interactive touch screens on shop fronts, then you could apply that to every single vertical quite readily.

When I was younger, I would have said that this is a description, a mirror of society - of how selfish we have become. But, if you are in the game of the Internet of Things and you are monetising so you can pay off your mortgage, then should you feel bad about the fact that you are fascinated by stuff being connected with each other?

The more that you look at singularity, the closer something like Terminator becomes in terms of reality. The more that you look at a film like Wall-E and consider the more obscene extensions of the Internet of Things, you end up in a fairly easy-to-imagine scenario where we don't need to do anything ourselves; everything is automated for us. Lamps can tell our loved ones that we love them, because when we touch a lamp, another lamp flickers. Where did calling someone and talking to them with our real voice, go? When was the last time that we wrote to someone whom we cared for? Where is the end of this automation?

 

Does Internet of Things also make the information-rich richer, and the information-poor poorer?

JM: Are the information-poor able to have richer information? It's like saying "Is capitalism wrong and communism right?" There's always a third version... are we prepared to live in a capitalist society which is more humanitarian, or a communist society with capitalist constructs?

It depends on the context. People that have access to information will have access to more information. People that have little access to information will probably have access to more information as well. Therefore, the question is: is there a limit as to how much information is enough? Is there such a thing as too much information? Is being information-rich an accurately subjective adjective? Is being 'rich' always positive? If I receive 15 times more information than you do about a subject, does that make me more 'wealthy' in terms of information? My thesis is that we may be looking at a volumetric metric of wealth, rather than a qualitative one. There is a quantitative assessment that more is better, whereas there is an argument that it should be more qualitative to work out what wealth is.

 

What is the USP of Internet of Things? Does one exist?

JM: The USP of mobile is that it's an extension of our personal selves. However, that isn't accepted to be the USP by people that exploit the mobile channel for their own commercial purposes. The USP of the Internet of Things will be seen to be the fact that this is a multi-billion-touchpoint media environment, which is a horrific outcome in any humane eyes. It could be bringing disparate communities and cultures closer together through understanding. If you look at something like McCann Erickson's Ikea catalogue, the USP of it is that you can hold a device over it and new content will appear, making the catalogue a multimedia content environment. This is a wonky architecture - holding a piece of plastic and glass with a chip over a piece of paper - but it's nascent. If you extend that through into a few years from now, I wouldn't be surprised if there is a retail catalogue with in-built connectivity... which is where the Internet of Things story goes. In that circumstance, you could imagine that I could give a catalogue to my cousin in South America, and they could see their local, contextually-aware version, which is harmonised with that society, government, environment, and structure. Equally, we could share each other's context so we could learn more about what a sofa means in South America and the UK. Looking at a sofa catalogue means different things, so the USP could be a bridging of cultures.

Even as I say that, I am totally aware of the fact that is far too altruistic for any commercial exploitation and inside a business environment, the USP of things tends to be determined by the likelihood of capital exploitation. The USP of mobile in terms of business is that there a several billion subscriptions, making it the largest media channel on Earth. The USP of mobile for people is that it's the same thing that we rest our chin next to, and say "I love you" though... and, now, their wallet and remote control too. The USP will come from a commercial, capitalist standpoint, rather than from a humanist one.

 

Internet of Things is seen as a "ring-fenced" discipline, in the same way that 'Mobile' is, and 'Digital' is. How do we ensure that it is managed in a way which is right, rather than as another bubble?

JM: It's likely that we, as a collective of business people, will have to do as we have done with every other media channel, and every other technological innovation: wait for it to mature in front of our eyes, and for it to manifest itself into however it is organically used by people. My personal fears are of exploitation. It's the natural inclination I have, based on what I now see the Internet being littered by - spambots, mobile numbers being abused globally, and so on. What I have called in the past "the fallacy of technology that can", is that we tend to build things because they are possible to be built, and then we are able to exploit things because they exist to be exploited. Being pragmatic, this will unfold in its own way and we will find large advertising agencies, media companies who are extremely turned on by this potential availability of trillions of connected devices from the potential of the media channel... in any hype cycle, we almost have to go there to come back. We almost have to enable things to go to their ridiculousness to find the impetus to then start filtering down. My thinking is that the more connected we are to things, the more of a requirement we have to filter for meaning.

The irony with that thesis is - should we put in place some form of protocol so that exploitation doesn't happen? How can I say that if, in fact, we need exploitation to happen to find meaning? It's a total paradox, but I fear that things will become less charming and 'lamp-family-like' and more exploitative and dark, before we go back to the way that utilities can be making lives better.

 

AD-S: The key example of a piece of technology that keeps on getting sexier is RFID. It has been in the logistics and security markets for years, but only recently has it made the jump to things like NFC. They all use the same technology, but we are moving away from a lucrative but incredibly boring world into one where I can quickly pay for my snack. It's a really slow understanding of the potential of technologies that we have been surrounded with for years. We didn't really consider how ubiquitous they were without considering whether they were a good idea or not. We have suddenly come up with a term which gives people a narrative - why these things are there, what they are capable of - so we can then build scenarios as to what might or might not happen, even though the technology has been around for a long time.

Of course there is exploitation. Someone from the MOD recently said that the Internet of Things is brilliant, which is hilarious, as they have fought wars with much more interesting technologies than those generally available to us. It's an interesting trajectory in terms of storytelling, and what the Internet of Things can do in terms of scenarios, rather than just 'building stuff'. But, we also need to figure out what works and what doesn't, and let the market respond. Every technology conference that I have been to which has a track on the Internet of Things... there is always someone that raises their hand and asks "What about privacy and security?" These are the issues that we should be discussing. The iPhone tracks every place that you have ever been to, without necessarily asking for your permission.

 

Do you see the concept of the Internet of Things as being an interim one? Is the term a help or a hindrance?

AD-S: It's useful, because it's more useful that any term which came before it... all of which were far too technical: Embedded Systems, for example I think that people can be confused at first as to what the Internet of Things might mean, particularly as it could be applied to almost anything. Logistics businesses are now using the term, even though they have just rebranded what they have done. This is certainly the case with companies offering the technology, without any means of making the world around you respond to what it does. In a way, social media is a little like that - what does it mean? But, after a while, people didn't worry what it meant. Associating a term to a young industry is useful. If we didn't have the term 'Internet of Things', then people wouldn't write about it, care about it, and it would just be one of those things that either stay in the art world or academia... like 'nanotechnology'.

 

We are going to have more data and connectivity around us, and the Internet of Things is becoming increasingly important as a result. How do we build our individual and collective means of filtering?

JM: We all have an absolute right for personal accountability, in terms of how we get through the useless noise in order to find the right signal. From my personal point of view, the way in which I deal with stuff that matters [to me] is by starting from a perspective of purpose. I would look for what I'm trying to achieve and what my purpose is in general, and then build out or find whatever solution matches that. That's exactly how I work with clients. Everything that we do as people and as companies, strategically, should start with an objective. To go about personally filtering the amount of stuff around us to the things that we need, it would seem logical to start with an objective first. The good news is that we have tools around us, from automated task management on Android through to Ifttt. There are plenty of tools to supply our tactics with the fuel that they need. We're left with what's further up the chain, the objectives and strategies. It would be enough of a starting point to work out what it is that we are trying to achieve.

Two families that are separated by an ocean, who do not have the time to speak with each other on the phone but would like to have a 'nudge' to know that the other family is thinking of them... seeing a lamp turn off and on could be a worthy nudge... like a tap on the arm, or a squeeze of the hand. If the objective were framed like that, then it would be a type of solution that we would use.

An objective in my life is to see if I could possibly use no computers. Because I spend a great deal of time using them, I spend less time thinking and talking in real life with real people. My life's ambition is to remove almost everything that we surround ourselves with... which is probably an unwinnable task, but that's not the point. The point is that my objective is to remove as much as possible, so my filter is massively reductive. Chromebooks, which allow everything to run in Google Drive, seem like a worthy exploration due to the fact that I don't really want to store anything. If my objective is set, then the way of filtering becomes far easier. If you don't have an objective set, then all you do is fill your life up with noise, at which point the argument becomes concerned with filling one's life up by doing so. It's a loser's argument.

 

AD-S: I agree; it depends on what you're trying to do, and of course there are many different types of users out there. Back in the days when everything was about mobile usage, there was a Brazilian study which asked whether people have enough friends in their address book, and everyone replied no, irrespective of how many friends and contacts they had. There is an age thing associated with how much we feel; now, having tagged along with the Internet and data-producing-stuff for a while, we think "Can we just clean that up?" However, when you're new to it, how do you build that up from scratch? How do you enter a world that seems like it's full of interesting, busy people, creating and using lots of things? There is an opposite problem here: not knowing how to start. It will possibly be the same with devices. Many of my friends are using Nike Fuel; if I start using these social data-collecting tools, how much social pressure is there to compete, quite aggressively and quite quickly, with people, to be producing data and to be keeping up with everything? Those are things that have always existed. Every time you walked in to a new school, it was like "I don't know anybody". That's always going to be happening. There will be people that have either been there for ever and are so tired and culling their friends lists and throwing away redundant devices, and people that are a bit frightened and unsure of what to do. I know people through Facebook that have not opened a Twitter account; when I tell them how brilliant it is, they reply that they just would not know where to start. These are same problems, but with different tools, and with different interactions.

 

Further information on Alexandra and Jonathan is available on their websites (Alexandra, Jonathan) and Twitter (@iotwatch, @jmacdonald).


