Jon Ritman: from Artic to apps
au-al-0236-1000
Copyright 2012 Perini Networks Europe Ltd.
CC BY-NC-ND

Jon Ritman is one of the best-known programmers for the Sinclair ZX Spectrum. With titles such as 3D Combat Zone, the Match Day series, Head over Heels and Batman under his belt, he has a formidable history of gaming development which in fact covers a variety of platforms.

-> Pic

We caught up with Jon to discuss the past, the present, and the future of gaming from his personal perspective.

-> Read more

How did you start in game development?
 
I used to work for Radio Rentals as a TV engineer. In 1981, they were floating the idea of renting out home computers, and I thought it would be a good thing if I understood them, as I presumed they would need specialised engineers. With this in mind, I went out and bought the just-released Sinclair ZX81 and taught myself to program it. From there, it was a short step to programming my first game. To be totally honest I couldn’t think what else I could do with my newfound skill. I found myself mending TVs during the day and spending most evenings and nights writing games. It wasn't long before I was earning more from the games than the day job, so I left Radio Rentals and slept during the day instead.

  
How did moving from Artic to Ocean feel? Given Ocean's position and perception in the marketplace at the time, did it feel like a recognition of your talents?
 
I never really thought about it that way at the time. I was immersed in game development, when Ocean’s David Ward rang me to ask how the game we had briefly talked about many months previously, was going. When I told him that it was almost finished, he just offered me a lot of money - and that was that. Of course, I loved the level of publisher support I got from Ocean; such a professional operation for those days.

  
Do you feel that the ways in which game development was undertaken in that era – one-person programmers or small teams, given carte blanche – have gone? Will the era of apps bring it back, do you think?
 
It is funny how we seem to have gone full circle. For years, I saw game design mired in the bean-counters' timid approach to new ideas; the need for good sales because of the huge development costs making them unwilling to take chances. Now, once again, costs can be low and people can let their imagination run riot. I look forward in anticipation to see what new ideas will emerge.

  
Further, do you think that technologies such as the Kinect will create new forms of gameplay? Are there emerging technologies which you are excited about?
 
I have long said that new methods of control open new possibilities to designers. Every single one creates a whole raft of new ideas. What I’d really like to see would be systems controlled by voice and eye movement. I’m sure they can’t be that far away...

  
Given the phenomenal history that you have across a multitude of platforms, is there a particular platform / language / dev environment that you have most enjoyed working with?
 
I think the time working in machine code, but on my own development platform, GLAM (Global Language Assembler Monitor), was the most fun. I could do whatever I wanted, and if I felt the dev environment needed a new tool, I just wrote it.

GLAM handled a wide range of processors and platforms, and was used by Rare to produce many of their games.

 
What are you working on at the moment?
 
Decorating the downstairs loo. Completing a lovely bit of boxing-in, to hide all the pipework, that can completely deconstruct with a little pushing and pulling yet is totally solid to the touch. I can look at it and smile in exactly the same way I did the first time I got the AI working in Match Day.

 
Which games, and programmers, from the 80s do you – or did you – admire?
 
Chris Stamper & Sandy White for programming. Knight Lore for the game that made me stand there with my jaw on the floor the first time I saw it.


Jon Ritman's personal website details many of his works from the early 1980s onwards.
http://www.ritman.co.uk/

World of Spectrum carries a full index of Jon's work.
http://www.worldofspectrum.org/infoseekpub.cgi?regexp=^Jon+Ritman$&loadpics=1
