au-al-0250-1000
Copyright 2012 Perini Networks Europe Ltd
CC NC-BY-ND

Age ain't nothing but a number

An aging population is often seen in the west as a problem. As the population lives longer, the average age moves up, with the result being lots of healthy people who have retired from work.

(Pic)

Because these people have many years of active life ahead of them, they are starting to benefit from an increasing number of digital innovations. One such endeavour is from Adil Abrar and the team at Sidekick Studios.

(Read more)

The Amazings is a project which is fundamentally based on a different way of looking at old age: one which is more positive, creative, and optimistic about an aging population. A quarter of a million people between 50 and 65 retire each year, although it's perhaps rather difficult to consider retired people as assets with much still to offer life, when they are weighted down by labels such as “Pension timebombs”. 

The project effectively aims to bring retired people back into active service, offering a web-based tool where they can offer services in an informal marketplace. It doesn't pre-determine what these services are, so for people looking for Tango lessons, creative consultancy or help in foraging, it's possible that The Amazings will have something – someone – to offer.

The man behind the project is Adil Abrar, the founder of London-based innovation agency Sidekick Studios. The agency is a sort of “think and do tank”, in that it focuses on the future of social enterprises and ventures, wrapping its projects into actual startups. Abrar's other projects include Buddy, a mobile app which helps anxiety and depression sufferers; and Sidekick Studios, an incubator for charities that wish to create digitally-centric startups of their own.

With this project, the agency started by thinking about how demographic changes have opened chasms in society, and how the web can provide a kind of “social glue”.

“We were looking at social care and how to do social care differently. We had an idea about a 'care swap'. We all have people who we love and care for, but they are often in other parts of the country. Could we create some kind of scheme that allows me to care for your mum in Oxford, with you caring for my mum in Birmingham?

“So, we went out and talked with some older people. As soon as we started talking with them about what we were doing, we realized that the idea needed reworking. These people don't want to be cared for, necessarily - particularly if they have just retired. What they want is self-esteem, to keep active, to be doing social things, to be meeting people, to meet different generations, and the main think that we spotted is that they have something to give. We should not be just sending them on activities - the old model - putting them into a minibus and take them down to Bournemouth.”

A pilot project ran in the London borough of Hackney before Christmas, with some success. Since then, it has spun out and taken more of the self-contained “startup” shape that Sidekick performs on its projects. A team has been appointed, with a full brand and website developed to reinforce the self-contained approach. Those offering help and those seeking help are getting together, and there is a value exchange taking place.

While The Amazings clearly doesn't seek to be a cheap way of bringing in labour, it isn't a glammed-up volunteering scheme, either. The project, as Abrar agrees, exists somewhere in between. Not all Amazings participants are in it for financial reward. If this all sounds like it ticks the right boxes in terms of a social enterprise (did someone say Big Society?), it is not as if these issues have only just surfaced. Abrar is less interested in whether it should have really existed, say, a decade ago, than whether it should exist now, at all.

“There is definitely supply-and-demand now. We believe from the bottom of our heart that all [older people] have amazing skills. They might not know it, or think it, but they do... and those skills have value, and we think that people want to learn those skills.
We have always thought, as a society, that we learn from our elders... but that connection has been lost a little bit in the way that society has changed. And we want to bring it back.”

The Amazings is very much in its infancy, moving from its Hackney pilot base to now covering the whole of London. Abrar claims that while the project's focus remains on London for now, he has received enquiries from towns and cities across the UK and even further afield, suggesting that the project has much more potential before it reaches critical mass. The website is to feature a greater set of self-management tools, so people can offer and acquire services in a way more akin to a disintermediated virtual marketplace. 

And, perhaps the point of The Amazings is just that – delivering innovation in a demographic sector whose size and power just keeps on growing. Perhaps it's time to retire the cliché of the Silver Surfer once and for all.


Adil is founder of Sidekick Studios, and is @adilabrar on Twitter. For further information on The Amazings, visit the website.
www.theamazings.com


Adil is talking about The Amazings at the SCAMP conference, organised by SheSaysUK and taking place on 14/06/12 at Google Campus, London. 
For further information and to book, visit the SCAMP Eventbrite page.
http://scampconference2012london.eventbrite.co.uk
