au-al-0248-1000
Copyright 2012 Perini Networks Europe Ltd
CC NC-BY-ND

Sleeping Upright is a new project from Nottingham-based artist Candice Jacobs. It is designed to develop and exchange new ideas regarding the interrelationship between the Internet and contemporary art. Each artist involved in the project can sell their work through the Sleeping Upright website.

(Pic)

Launching the site is an online exhibition, “Reception Area”, which features new work from 10 female artists. We invited two of them, Lucy Woodhouse and Leslie Kulesh, to talk about their work and their involvement in the project.

(Read More)
 
Please tell us about your work for Sleeping Upright.

LK: Total is a 12 minute video on a loop. The work is a continuation of my experiments in audience participation. The video has a repetitive visual element paired with my voice walking the viewer through a visualization. The work is complete when my viewer is participating in the exercise. The text I read on the video was performed live in London earlier this month, seeing me interrupt a band mid-set and take over the stage. This work challenges the expectations of my audience. What do they get out of being passive versus active in the work?

LW: For the Sleeping Upright exhibition I have made a piece called Market Forces (Whitechapel Traders). I wanted to document something real and to translate this into an online version of itself - to create a unique portrait of an area or an action. The images of hands are documentation of an exchange between some market traders and myself.  I went to Whitechapel Market and gave each trader some small change, in exchange for an image of their hand – a collaboration through which we became both producer and consumer. 

Hands symbolise so much. They are used to identity people, and also to tell peoples fortunes. Here, they represent the act of individuals giving and receiving buying and making then multiplying and looping into a fractal format into something new and abstract - a hypnotic type of dance.

 
With Sleeping Upright's aim to sell its work online, is this the first time that you have sold your work in this way? What are your thoughts on selling your work online?

LW: This is a first for me, and it’s an interesting new concept. It’s experimental, and this is what interests me about it: in an area where popular information often moves virally, and how interest or value is often reflected through sharing or numbers of views. Sleeping Upright is using the opposite by limiting this to create an idea of an original and therefore value.

LK: I am interested to see if it sells. I am happy if someone wants to own this piece, and I like the idea of them turning to it when they want and possibly sharing it with others. The text that I read during the piece points out that the video is simply a signpost to a place we can all go to. Someone may want a signpost to remember the way.

Do you consider digital art to have a different commercial perception to other art forms which have well-defined commercial structures (painting, sculpture)?

LW: After finance, I imagine the Internet to be one of the most powerful communal languages. The way we make interact, communicate, and consume is changing. This lack of definition allows a freedom to communicate ideas differently - to create new types of spaces and to challenge those existing commercial structures.

LK: I do consider digital art to have a different commercial perception to other art forms. Digital art is meant to be viewed digitally; other forms of art are best experienced in person. This changes the ways in which they are translated into commodity. Right now, a lot of people in the digital art world are debating monetization. As I am not a digital artist, I prefer not to enter that debate. The work I made for Sleeping Upright directly addresses my practice's divorce from the digital. The work only exists when the viewer is engaged. There is no room for the apathetic engagement indicative of surfing the web.
 

How has your work been used?
 
LW: The piece is being shown as part of Reception Area  and will be on display in the study at Nottingham Contemporary. I am one of ten female artists who will show a work here for one day only, which will then be viewable online via the Sleeping Upright website.
 
What's your view on the digital art market in coming years? More sophisticated buyers with more money to spend? A chance to develop more innovative and creative work? A greater acceptance of digital art from the public? 
 
LW: I see this transitional period from page to screen as a richly creative and exciting time. There are so many new ways in which to interact and communicate ideas that leave behind a trail of rapidly outmoded ones. I think there is great value in a digital artwork and its ability to reflect this ongoing transition, but who knows if these will ever generate any monetary value? That’s why this is an exciting project. Maybe we should ask Mark Zuckerberg.



Further information on the work of Leslie and Lucy – and all 10 artists – is available at the Sleeping Upright website.
www.sleepingupright.com
