au-al-0207-1003
Copyright 2012 Perini Networks Europe Ltd
CC BY-NC-ND

In conversation with... Suzie Quill and Mel Fong Brown 



At Imperica, we love discussing both art and advertising, so the opportunity to talk about art within advertising was impossible to turn down. Bringing these concepts together is a new project called Higher Pitch, which celebrates artistic talent through gallery exhibitions and much more.

(Pic)

We caught up with the co-founders of Higher Pitch, Mel Fong Brown and Suzie Quill, to find out more about it.

(Read more)

Please introduce Higher Pitch and the background to its creation.

MFB: The idea behind Higher Pitch is to create a hub of outstanding creative people working in the world of advertising, all of whom want to show themselves and others their true talents over and beyond their day job.

Like so many things, Higher Pitch first came about over a bottle of wine in Soho House. There were four of us: a director, a creative researcher, an art director and a directors’ rep. We all met to moan about the lack of creative freedom within advertising, over a glass of wine. We spoke of how, despite our artistic backgrounds and the fact we all worked in a ‘creative’ industry, we weren’t really being truly creative. We were frustrated. We also chatted about the number of people we knew who were as frustrated as we were. 

At the time, as we are all women, we also spoke about the lack of female representation in advertising. We thought a way to push true, personally-driven creativity by women in the advertising industry was to have an art exhibition. We wanted them to show us what they were capable of, without restriction. We wanted them and us to stop moaning and show us, their bosses and clients what they got. Initially we called it Man The Fuck Up. It was obviously totally wrong, but at the time, and after a glass or two of vino, we were pretty fired up. After a couple of sleeps, we came up with the name Higher Pitch, which we thought far more appropriate.

In the end, it was only Suzie and me who organised the first Higher Pitch show in 2010. The others had heavy work commitments, but still continue to support us when they can. 

SQ: During our first call for submissions, we had so many men ask us if they could enter, it made us sad that we could be missing out on exposing more artistic gems.  So, we decided in 2011 to open up the show to everyone who worked in the global advertising industry.

We’re now preparing for the next Higher Pitch Art Sells exhibition, that will take place in Cannes this year. It is absolutely the right place for us to be exhibiting.  As Cannes brings together both clients and agencies, we can showcase true creative talent - talent without restrictions - from the world of advertising to exactly the people who need to be seeing it.



What, in your view, are the reasons behind artistic talent being under-celebrated in advertising?

SQ: The creative industry is now, more often than not, dictated to by the clients, with the creative agency simply towing the line.  Clients have their own targets to meet, and when times are tough, they will want to play it safe.  Agencies shouldn’t allow this – they should find a way to show their clients that if they are allowed the freedom to be truly creative, they could deliver so much more than just hitting the targets. Through these exhibitions, we want to show everyone the true talent of everyone working in the industry, in the hope that those commissioning work will start to see what they could be getting... if only they let go a little.

MFB: Artistic talent, when it is allowed to shine, is definitely celebrated. That’s the thing. Advertising is extremely good at celebrating talent, in the many hugely expensive awards ceremonies all around the world. When there is an ad which has obviously been given freedom and client faith, it wins all the awards. Not only that, it’s also very effective: it sells stuff. But, even though we already celebrate artistic talent in this industry, there could be so much more to celebrate if clients just stepped back a little and gave us the faith to do what we are really excellent at. That’s why we work in advertising and were employed by them.

Art communicates. If you make something look good and relate to someone, they will want it more. That’s ultimately why we called our 2011 show Art Sells..



How would campaigns be made more effective if artistic talents were given more of a chance to flourish?

MFB: Art has been used to sell things forever. It’s obvious that if you want to sell anything, you are more likely to have a successful sale if it is presented well. If a product or service looks great and different, makes you laugh and relates to you emotionally, you are more likely to remember it and want it. To make an idea engaging, beautiful to look at, humourous, and memorable... it takes creative and artistic imagination. Art communicates this, and campaigns are all about communicating to the consumer, so art = communication = effective campaign. For a campaign to be as effective as possible, it should be as artistically creative as it can be.



Has advertising let strategy become too dominant?

MFB: I think strategy is hugely important, but it has become far too technical and more like a scientific formula. We don’t leave enough to instinct any more. There’s a lot of box-ticking and justification. You can feel the fear of some brands, just by noting the amount of research they do. It often means that due to lengthy research, they have missed an opportunity in a short-lived trend that could have made their campaign so much more effective. We have heard of brands that air commercials two years after they are made; how relevant can that ad possibly be?

What education is required on the part of the client to adopt a greater appreciation of artistic talent? Do brand managers need to bite their tongue and not care so much about explicit uniformity?

MFB: Both clients and brand managers need to learn to listen to the creative experts they have employed to work magic on their brand. That artistic talent will shine through when people know it’s ok to do so. Clients have become more creatively educated, and while that’s not necessarily a bad thing, there is a reason why they employed a creative team – it is for their creative and artistic talent, which should be recognised, respected and given the space to flourish as that is when it works best for the work, the clients and their customers. 

Of course, there needs to be collaboration between clients and creatives, but it needs to be a much more balanced relationship. There really is no point in employing someone to do something and then doing it yourself.

SQ: There is also a clear need for the creative industry to show their clients what they are really capable of, to help clients have the confidence to give that responsibility back to the creative team. That is what Higher Pitch and our exhibitions are really all about. 



If art should be at the heart of every ad campaign, how would that change planning?

MFB: Ultimately, planning, trend forecasting... that’s looking at culture, and art reflects culture. It would mean that planning would follow culture, and the reaction to it, in a creative and artistic way. Planning would be more of an observation of the world, yet be more in collaboration with the creative forces behind future campaigns.



How do we attract the truly creative – the bold, the 'outsiders', the creatively challenging – to want to play a role in taking advertising forward?

MFB: We need to show how creatively tempting this industry can be, and we all need to take part in making our jobs what we want them to be. We have to prove to clients and to ourselves that we can continually and consistently make high quality, artistically creative, different, engaging campaigns when given the freedom to do so.  We have to stop being afraid. We need to bring the magic back. The magic is art. Not everyone can make art, but we can.



We hear the adage "attention is the new currency" a lot. Are we therefore underplaying the contribution that artistic creativity can make – to help to generate that attention?

SQ: Absolutely. We are naturally attracted to things that are different from the norm: be it more beautiful, uglier, more shocking or just different. It holds our attention for longer, because we’re not used to it, or because it’s beautiful and we just want to keep looking at it.



How did you devise and curate Art Sells?

SQ: Art Sells 2011 was our second exhibition and had much more interest than the first. We received over 150 submissions from all walks of life in advertising across the globe. With this, we had to be more selective on the work we chose to exhibit. Our selection came down to what we thought was interesting, showed artistic skill, and was personal to the artist.

Having already titled the exhibition Art Sells, there was an element of choosing work that could be linked to selling in a commercial way.  We felt that most of the work submitted could be worked into a advertising piece, or if not, showed strong elements of being worked into an interesting ad campaign. The result of the exhibition was a cross-section of media, with subjects that were bold, fun, fresh and interesting.

We are in full swing in preparing the selection of work for our next exhibition at Cannes Lions. It will be on a smaller scale, with only 10 artists, all of whom were nominated by their colleagues. But, it wasn’t ever based on the amount of nominations; artists only needed one nomination to be considered for exhibition; it isn’t a popularity contest [!]



Does advertising simply require more leaders to understand both the commercial and artistic potential of what it can achieve – does it simply need more Charles Saatchis, with a foot in both camps?

The two should go hand in hand for sure. The whole point of us starting Higher Pitch was to encourage more magic and creative talent, and to get the balance right again. Craft skills seem to have been pushed aside, and we’ve lost focus along the way. What’s happened to keeping things simple? All we need is that great idea, executed brilliantly in whatever medium best suited for it. It often feels like we are complicating things all too much.




Art Sells 2012 takes place on 20/06/12 2pm-8pm during Cannes Lions. It is an invitation-only event held at a prominent location on the Boulevard de la Croisette. For further information, email Mel and Suzie at hello@higherpitch.com.
