[Intro] Art director, graphic designer and artist Dio Lau is holding his first exhibition in London. "Confession in Water" focusses on Lau's relationship as an artist with the body, and societal perceptions of the body and bodily form.

[Pic]

We caught up with Dio to talk about his work and influences.

--

Please introduce your new exhibition for us, and how it relates to your career and work to date.

Confession In Water is my first solo exhibition, curates by Liat Chen, the Creative Director of the Book Club. The exhibition will show a collection of digital collages, prints and illustrations, along with the debut screening of a collaborative short film.

The title of the exhibition came from a quote of Albert Camus: “A guilty conscience need to be confess. A work of art is a confession”. I really like this intention of making art, where the confession here is in a broader sense. More than confessing one's wrongdoings to relief the guilt, it should go deeper than that. And it should be more primitive in a sense. It's rather a confession of one's weaknesses, vulnerabilities, lacks and limits. But, nothing is negative or based on self-denial here. If you don't dig up your weaknesses to confront them, you don't necessarily end up any stronger than you were. And, the beauty of art to me is exactly this liberating power. 

I always embrace the notion of art as the science of freedom. As Plato stated that “the unexamined life is not worth living'”, I can't be happier if people reflected themselves from my work, situated in an alternative state of awareness with it. 

Apart from doing visual arts, I work as a graphic designer. The majority of my job is art direction and graphic design of various music albums, theatres or concerts. The exhibition will show both my visual arts and design works, though it seems like no-one could tell which is which. 

Working up this exhibition, I found that I tended to blur the line between these two roles. It ends up that the works from both fields remained quite seamless. I don't know whether its wise to do that, but pushing the commercial boundary is an exciting thing to do. 

Nevertheless, it's quite tough to sell an unpleasant-looking visual. The “struggling of tone” has been an area of focus in my design career. You don't see an ad of a facial cream selling with a distorted restless face, though I still remember how fascinating the 'I shop therefore I am' campaign from Selfridges was, years ago.

I was trained in college that design is a means to solve problems, and to improve people's life. It sounds good and heroic to say that doesn't it? But, I did have problem with this. Žižek stated that the role of philosophy in contemporary society is not about giving an answer, but to ask the right question. Designers should take up that post too. It's not about producing new designs to solve problems, but producing new designs to locate problems, to “float” the real problems up, to project an alternative perspective with which to ponder over problems, or even, to invent new problems. I really want to go for that as a graphic designer.

I see this exhibition as a conclusion of my works and studies in recent years; but, it's a projection of a new route for the future, too. It's always good to have some check points in life, and see a new starting line drawn in front of your feet, isn't it?



Your new film features a man struggling in clay-like material. What – if any – commentary are you making through this very stark visual piece? Is it inferring anything on body modification, or personal entrapment within a conformist society, or something else?

It is a reflection of body-modification mania: facelifting, bodybuilding, plastic surgery and all. It's more a mania in Asia, though may be it have been too taken for granted to refer to it as a mania. Transfiguration techniques are nothing new, but we can't deny that it's easier these days. The ideology of it is always changing.

One's body is also a social body; it’s a spectacle that we treat it like the “capital of us”. The skin we live in is the skin we live up to. Apart from sticking your head on the self-help shelf, you can change your life by shaping every part of your body to be stronger or slimmer, younger or even younger, more like the celebrities or less like your families. The sexual difference upon this is liberated too. If you named yourself a metrosexual, it is completely normal to pay more than enough attention on how you look, all the way from inner to outer skins. There is even a term, medical cosmetology, to make those injections of face moulding and sculpting sounds more like health maintenance. It's quite a shock to know there even are people implanting metals into their legs, as to make the outline of them look more decent. 

The overflowing, penetrating advertisements of this industry in Hong Kong are annoying. The new thin means 'thinner than you are now'; keeping fit is to fit into the form of a perfect you. If you say entrapment, the entrapment is advanced. The gaze is self-installed and operated from within. We conform our bodies without being noticed. The passive conformation is transformed into an active, personal will. 

In the Lacanian Mirror stage, an infant sees its reflection from the mirror and suffers from its lack of bodily control. Its body is a broken one, in contrast with that of the completed image reflected. That triggers the first projection of ego. It’s an ongoing projection throughout life, that you are always projecting a more perfect you to be you. This projection makes the passive conformation seem active. Who would find it so compulsory, if you are just trying to be you?

In the video, I intended to visualise a contradicting, inward state. It is a co-existing state of both narcissistic enjoyments and destructive self-denials, happened in the highs and lows of body transfiguration. The clay-like material is the flesh. In the video, he is moulding and sculpting this semi-fluid thing, in pleasure or in pain, or both. He is always changing his form so that he could never be taken shape. I hope that this work could be a glimpse of a corporal unconsciousness.

This short film is a collaboration with pools of talented people that I am proud to work with. An actor, Adrian Heung, choreographed by contemporary dancer Cliff Huen, performs it. Cliff was dealing more with the psychological state of Adrian more than his movement. The process was so organic; Cliff kept whispering or shouting to him, sometimes inducing him almost like a hypnogenesis, sometimes violently provoking or even animalising him. That was a heavy task for Adrian, with the dense and heavy material with which he was struggling for a whole day. But, he did make it. When he was performing in such a state, even the air of the shooting studio was heavier. 

A selected collection of photos will be also shown in the exhibition. Ken Ngan was the photographer, and he gave room and trust to me to re-interpret his works too. The short film is co-directed with Anafelle Liu, a London based visual artist who is also an illustrator and animator. She edited the video and took a leading role in every process of the whole production. Without her, this work could never be made.



Why do you find the human body so fascinating?

Let me begin with introducing the Chinese word of body, 体, where the left part of the word is 人, which means human, the right part 本 is a hieroglyph illustrating the stem of a plant. It literally means origin and source, or capital and principal. 体, body, is thus the origin of man. 

The body is the primal site and the instrument of sensation and expression. In a work of art using the body as a subject or platform, the perception of it is very direct; that we instantly connected with our own selves to it. It's moving when you are watching a piece of contemporary dance, but not if the performer is replaced by some sort of android, robot, or animal. The corporal conscious of us is the reason why I am fascinated to work on human body. Sometimes, the work of it induces one to a state - skipping all the rational thinking or even the conscious mind. I embrace this instant perception and connection.



What interests you about the disruption of the body (distortion, dysmorphia)?

I can't refrain to admit that I am obsessed with it. The media I work with is often a two-dimensional one. Yet, a state of mind is never static or still, especially a disquieted one. All those bending, twisting, dislocating or disrupting treatments applied on the bodies are an attempt to capture this unsettled state. Also, the distorted and broken bodies are connected to one's self in an uncanny and sometimes unpleasant way. That little repulsiveness is something I aimed for too. For things that have to be hidden behind, consciously or not, and are often a bit harsh to confront. That's why they remained unseen. Most of the time I didn't think much when I was doing it, so they are more or less instinctive. 



The swirling lines and colours of some of your works, particularly those from earlier years, are almost psychedelic, with perhaps a more restrained style in your recent work. How would you describe your own stylistic journey?

The intention is the same. All I was doing is an attempt to visualize and reveal an inward state of mind, often the restless part I want to let it float on surface. I didn't really realize the change of style until you mentioned it. I reckon it's more a change from within myself. 

In the past, the unsettling mind was more violent and chaotic. When I was younger, the alienation often came in anger. It didn't soften and blunt with time. I won't say it is sophisticated, but it is indeed sunken, deepen and refined. The flow of energy is now pointing more inwards than spreading and leaking out.



How has moving from Hong Kong to London changed your influences, styles and references within your work?

The art scene here is heavenly, especially compared with that of Hong Kong, where some say it's a cultural desert. Here, tons of art happenings take place all the time; one never goes short of visual and spiritual charge. Nevertheless, the most crucial change is indeed culture itself. All of a sudden, I am situated in a strange place, in a different sense of time (Time runs a bit slower here really), in a crowd of different people with different souls. The difference of culture and positive or negative alienation keeps my eyes sensitive and objective. That deep observation offers me a room to ponder over everything. 

The retrained style you mentioned, I'd rather see it as a reflection of a self-possessed state that I am in. I become more lenient towards everything, including myself. The tone is more or less retained, but my manner is adjusted. And I am happy with that. I am embracing every chance to participate more and deeper into this culture with my works too.


--
Dio Lau's website features a wider selection of his works and further information. "Confession in Water" runs 24/05/12 - 07/06/12 at the Book Club in London. For further information, visit the Book Club's website.
http://www.diolau.co.uk/
http://www.wearetbc.com/
